File: README
Date: 6 Apr 2010

To use the following scripts, set the environmental variable $FRED_HOME
to the location of your FRED source directory.  Then add $FRED_HOME/bin
to your path.

NOTE: I also recommend starting with a fresh RESULTS directory, e.g.:
% mv $FRED_HOME/RESULTS $FRED_HOME/RESULTS.OLD

=====================================================================

% run_fred [-p paramsfile | -k key]

Runs FRED with the given parameter file in a working directory created
in the $FRED_HOME/RESULTS directory, and associates the working
directory with the key.  If the -p option is omitted, the file "params"
is assumed.  If the -k option is omitted, an internally generated key is
generated.  In either case, a <key,id> pair is printed on standard
output, where <id> is the identifier of directory associated with the
run (i.e. $FRED_HOME/RESULTS/RUN/<id>).

run_fred will terminate if the user supplied key has already been used.
If the params file duplicates a previous params file, then run_fred
associates the key with previous id, and does not re-run FRED.  The
script sets the STATUS of the request (see fred_status below).  When
FRED finishes, run_fred runs stats to collect data on S, E, I, R, I_s,
M, and AR.

% fred_status -k key [-s secs]

Prints the status of the FRED run associated with the given key.  If -s
option is given, repeats status report every secs seconds.

% fred_AR -k key

Returns mean and std dev of attack rate (AR) for run associated with
key.

% fred_plot -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|M]

Creates a plot of one or more of the indicated measures for the
indicated run.  The plot file (type PNG) is stored in RESULTS under the
run's REPORT directory.  Prints the full path to the plot file.

% fred_display_plot -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|M]

Runs fred_plot and then opens the resulting plot file (using Preview on
Macs).

% fred_plot_data -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|M]

Creates a plot of one of the indicated measures for the indicated run.
Prints the data for plotting the graph to standard output, in space
delimted format:

day mean stdev

% fred_chain -k key -r realization -a agent -d depth

Extracts from the appropriate tracefile all lines pertaining to agent a
and any agent subsequently infected by a, to depth d.  Prints the full
path to the resulting file.


