FRED User’s Guide
=================

John Grefenstette, Shawn Brown, Jay DePasse, David Galloway, Bruce Lee, Yu-Ting Weng
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

University of Pittsburgh
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Roni Rosenfeld, Alona Fyshe, Anuroop Sriram, Christopher Tischuk
----------------------------------------------------------------

Carnegie-Mellon University
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Nathan Stone
------------

Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Phil Cooley, Bill Wheaton
-------------------------

RTI International
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

27 Jan 2012
-----------

Acknowledgments
---------------

This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences MIDAS grant 1U54GM088491-01, and by the Vaccine Modeling
Initiative, funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The funders
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Introduction
============

The accelerating growth in data availability and corresponding advances
in high performance computing present new opportunities for *in silico*
analysis of complex public health questions using computational modeling
and simulation. FRED (A Framework for Reconstructing Epidemiological
Dynamics) is an open source, modeling system developed by the University
of Pittsburgh Public Health Dynamics Laboratory in collaboration with
the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center and the School of Computer Science
at Carnegie Mellon University. FRED supports research on the dynamics of
infectious disease epidemics, and the interacting effects of mitigation
strategies, viral evolution, and personal health behavior. The system
uses agent-based modeling based on census-based synthetic populations
that capture the demographic and geographic distributions of the
population, as well as detailed household, school, and workplace social
networks. Multiple circulating and evolving strains can be simulated.
 Mitigation strategies in the framework include vaccination, anti-viral
drugs, and school closure policies. FRED supports models of health
behavior change to facilitate the study of critical personal health
behaviors such as vaccine acceptance, personal hygiene and spontaneous
social distancing.  FRED is available through open source in the hopes
of making large-scale agent-based epidemic models more useful to the
policy-making community, the research community, and as a teaching tool
for students in public health.

History
-------

Previous research under Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study (MIDAS)
program has shown that computer simulation models can provide ways to
evaluate alternative intervention strategies for circumstances that
would be infeasible to study using controlled trials.  Previously, our
team has used detailed census-based simulations to examine interventions
in response to influenza pandemics, including vaccination policies (Lee
at al, 2009, 2010a, 2011), school closure (Lee at al, 2010b; Brown et
al, 2011), and the effects of commuting modalities (Cooley at al, 2011).
These studies have shown that computer simulation can often reveal the
relative value of competing health interventions, especially when
considering novel circumstances that cannot be examined through
observational or controlled studies. FRED is based largely on these
previous MIDAS agent simulations, bus has been completed redesigned to
support rapid development of new features and a wide range of research
studies.

Overview of this document
-------------------------

FRED is a research tool and this document is aimed at a target audience
of infectious disease modelers with a high degree of computational
experience. The pragmatics of obtaining, installing and running FRED
have been described in the FRED Quick Start Guide.  Please refer to that
document for instructions, and some short tutorials.  This document will
describe FRED on a conceptual level.  Developers will also want to
consult the code-level documentation and even the code itself for
specific implementation details.

Synthetic Population
====================

FRED uses the synthetic population developed by RTI, International [#]_.

.. [#] In summary, RTI used a proportional iterative method developed in
  (Beckman, et al. 1996) to generate an agent population from the US
  Census Bureau’s Public Use Microdata files (PUMs) and Census aggregated
  data.  See (Wheaton, et al. 2009) for a detailed description.  Each
  agent had a set of socio-demographic characteristics and daily behaviors
  that included age, sex, employment status, occupation, and household
  location and membership. (This section is based on the Supplemental
  Materials from (Cooley et al, 2011).

Assignment of students to Schools
---------------------------------

The synthetic population also represented schools and assigned persons
of school age to schools using methods described in (Cajka et al.,
2010).  Using information from the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES) a database of all public and private schools in the US
was developed, including each schools geolocation, and age-specific
capacity. A set of heuristics were developed to assign each school-age
child to a specific age-appropriate schools, using several assumptions
including:

-  Geographic proximity is a major criterion for making assignments.

-  Students are assigned to a school on the basis of distance along a
   network (roads) rather than distance along a straight line.

-  Students attend school only in their county of residence.

-  Students are assigned to a school according to the school’s capacity
   for their grade.

-  No special allowances are made to assign siblings to the same school,
   other than the fact that they shared the same geographic location and
   therefore should be assigned to the closest school that had capacity
   for their grade levels.

Workplace Data and Allocation Model
-----------------------------------

The RTI synthetic population also assigned employees to workplaces,
taking into account:

-  the number of persons who lived in one Census tract but worked in
   another and

-  the number of workplaces by size by the same Census tract.

Based on the number of firms by firm size category and Census block
group, synthetic workplaces were created and located at the centroid of
the block group indicated by the workplace’s address. Workers were then
assigned to those workplaces so that workers who reported working in a
specific block group were assigned at random to a firm located within
that block group. The workplaces also included schools, hospitals and
other types of institutions that could be used to specifically track
special synthetic agents such as teachers, health care workers, and
others.

One important issue in the STP64 data is how the Census asks the
question that is the source of the commuting estimate. Respondents were
asked to identify the place they spent the most time working at *in the
previous week*. This means that the US dataset contains data on regular
commutes to the individual’s typical workplace as well as occasional
work-related trips. As work trips lasting most of a week can be expected
to involve longer distances than a typical commute, one might attribute
the greater than expected number of very long distance commutes to such
occasional work-related travel.

Agent Model
===========

Agents in FRED represent individuals in a population living in a
specific geographic region.  For example, many of the initial studies
with FRED model the population of Allegheny County surrounding
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  The model of the population of Allegheny
County includes 1,242,755 agents.  Each agent has associated with its
demographic information (e.g., age, date-of-birth, sex), health
information (e.g., current health status, date of infection, level of
symptoms, infectiousness, susceptibility), locations for social activity
(household, neighborhood, and possibly school or workplaces), and
health-related behaviors (e.g., probability of getting a vaccine or
staying home when sick).  During each simulated day, agents interact
with the other agents who share the same social activity locations.  If
an infectious agent interacts with a susceptible agent, there is a
possibility of transmitting a disease from the infected agent to the
susceptible agent.  FRED simulates the population of agents during a
period of time, usually several months, and tracks the spread of disease
among the population.  Since each infection event is recorded, it is
possible to analyze the course of an infection through the population,
and to evaluate several possible control measures.          

The main program is contained in Fred.cc [#]_.

.. [#] For further details about the representation of individual agents,
  see files: ``Person.cc``, ``Population.cc``.

Demographics
------------

The population input file specifies the sex, the age (in years), the
marital status, and the profession of each agent. By default, these
demographic features remain constant during a simulation run. FRED
agents are given a random birthday such that the age in years agrees
with the age listed in the population input file.

FRED also supports dynamic demographics: aging, births and deaths. These
optional features are controlled by the parameters ``enable_aging``,
``enable_births``, and ``enable_deaths``, respectively. If aging is
enabled, then an agent’s age increases on each birthday. If births are
enabled, then each female of child-bearing age may become pregnant on
any simulation day using age-specific maternity rates provided in the
``yearly_maternity_rate_file``.  Upon becoming pregnant, the agent is
assigned a due-date based on a Gaussian distribution with a mean of 280
days and a standard deviation of 7 days.  When the due-date arrives, the
mother gives birth to a new agent who is assigned a random sex and is
assigned to the same household as the mother.  If death is enabled, then
on each agent’s birthday, it is decided whether that agent will die
during the coming year using age-specific mortality rates provided in
the ``yearly_mortality_rate_file``. When an agent dies, it is removed
from the population.  For further details, see the source file
``Demographics.cc``.

Health
------

Each agent maintains a list of current infections (one for each
disease).  An infection follows a natural history (e.g., latent period,
infectious period, symptomatic period, as well as infectiousness) as
specified via input parameters.  Agents’ health information also
includes disease status (S, E, I, R), immunity, at-risk status,
susceptibility, current symptom levels, and how many others have been
infected by this agent.  See ``Health.cc`` for further details.

Activities
----------

An agent follows a daily pattern of interactions with groups of other
agents.  All interactions in FRED occur in a specific place.  The types
of places in FRED include: Households, Neighborhoods, School,
Classrooms, Workplaces and Offices. Classrooms are small mixing groups
with a given School.  Offices are smaller mixing groups with Workplaces.
Each agent maintains list of “favorite places”, at most one for each of
the above types.  Agent may have undefined favorite places if they do
not participate in that activity.  For example, adults do not have a
defined School or Classroom. On a typical day, the agent interacts with
other agents in each favorite place that is defined.

Neighborhoods are defined on a grid with 1 km square cells.  The agent’s
home neighborhood is the cell in which its household is located.

However, an agent may visit another neighborhood in the community
during a given day.  The decision about where to spend the neighborhood
activity period is made independently each day, with the highest
probability to visit the home neighborhood, and a lesser probability to
visit one of the surrounding neighborhoods, and a small probability of
visiting a randomly selected neighborhood within a given community
radius.

If an agent is infectious, then any location the agent visits during
that day is considered an infectious location.  Susceptible agents can
only become infected at an infectious location, so interactions among
agents at non-infectious locations need not be simulated.

Schools are closed on weekends and during schedule summer holidays.
Schools may also be closed due to school closure policies.  Students do
not visit their school when the school is closed.

Similarly, most workers do not visit their workplaces on weekends.
However, some workers are designated as weekend workers, and they
continue to visit workplaces on weekends.

To reflect weekend schedules of schools and workplaces, the number of
neighborhood contacts is increased by 50% on weekends.

See ``Activities.cc`` for more details.

Behaviors
---------

FRED is designed to include any number of health-related behaviors.  New
behaviors can be added with minimal programming effort.  Each behavior
involves a decision on the willingness of the agent to perform the
behavior.  The current set of behaviors includes:

#. **Stay home when sick**: If an adult is symptomatic, is that person
   willing to stay home?  If so, the agent withdraws to the household,
   does not interact with other in the neighborhood, at work or at
   school.  The agent also does not begin new overnight travel.

#. **Keep child home when sick**: If a child is symptomatic, is the
   child’s adult decision-maker willing to have the child withdraw to
   the household.   In this case, the same restrictions on contact apply
   as in the adult “stay at home when sick” behavior.

#. **Accept vaccine**:  Is an adult willing to accept a vaccine, if one
   is available?

#. **Accept vaccine for child**: This is the adult’s willingness to have
   a child vaccinated.

#. **Accept another vaccine dose**: If a vaccine requires more than one
   dose, is the agent willing to accept an additional dose?

#. **Accept another vaccine does for child**:  Same as above, but the
   decision is made by an adult on behalf of a child.

Future behaviors may include: wearing a face mask; taking anti-viral
prophylaxis; staying home when well; keeping children home when well;
avoiding travel; avoiding neighborhood contacts; hand-washing; and
others.

Adult Decision-makers for Children
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The synthetic population used by FRED was developed by RTI,
International using a process described in (Wheaton et al, 2009).
Household level Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) includes the ages,
sexes, and relationships of all individuals within a household.
Households from the PUMS are selected with replacement to make up the
synthetic population, selecting households so that the census counts and
other statistical distributions are maintained at the census block
level.  As a result of this process, the FRED synthetic population
includes information giving the relationship of each member of the
household to the Householder (typically, the owner of the house or the
head of the household.)  This information is used to assign an adult in
the household as the responsible decision-maker for the health-related
behaviors of each child in the household.  The rules for selecting the
adult decision-maker for each child are as follows:

#. If the Householder is the parent (natural parent, adoptive parent,
   step-parent) of the child, then the Householder is designated the
   child’s decision-maker.

#. If the Householder is the grandparent of the child and there is an
   adult in the householder who is a child of the Householder, then the
   first such adult is designated as the decision-maker for the child.
    Note that the household relationship data does not provide enough
   information to determine whether such an adult is actually the parent
   of the child in question.

#. If the Householder is the grandparent of the child and not plausible
   adult parent is present in the household, then the Householder is
   designated the decision-maker for the child.

#. Otherwise, a random adult in the household is designated as the
   decision-maker for the child.

The rules above permit multiple decision-makers per household.  No
preference is made on the basis of sex or age, other than that each
decision-maker is an adult (i.e., at least 18 years old.)

Behavior Strategies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

How real people make health decisions is an active area of research
without an obvious consensus theory.  Indeed, it seems likely that
different people use different methods to come to decisions about
health-related behavior. FRED agents can apply a variety of strategies
to determine their willingness to adopt a given behavior. Each agent may
revisit its willingness to perform the give behavior. Thus each strategy
specification includes a frequency parameter that determines how often
agents make decisions about their willingness to perform the behavior.

#. **Refuse**: Agent is never willing to perform the given behavior.

#. **Accept**: Agent is always willing to perform the given behavior.

#. **Flip Behavior**: Agent is assigned a fixed probability *p* of being
   willing to perform the given behavior.  The agent revisits its
   willingness to perform the behavior according to the frequency
   parameter.

#. **Imitate Prevalence**:  The agent is assigned an initial probability
   *p* of being willing to perform the given behavior. The agent
   revisits its willingness to perform the behavior according to the
   frequency parameter.  When reconsidering the decision, the agent
   estimates the prevalence of willingness among the agents in its
   social networks: household, neighborhood, school and workplace. The
   estimate is a weighted average of the actual prevalence in each
   group.  Given the weighted estimate, the agent adjusts its
   probability *p* toward the perceived prevalence.  For example, if the
   agent perceives that the prevalence of willingness is 0.75, then it
   adjusts its own probability to be closer to 0.75.

#. **Imitate Consensus:** This strategy is similar to the Imitate
   Prevalence except that if the weighted estimate of prevalence exceeds
   a threshold, the agent adjusts its probability *p* toward 1;
   otherwise the agent adjusts its probability toward 0.  For example,
   if the agent’s threshold is 0.5, then if the agent perceives that the
   majority of its associates is willing to perform the behavior then
   the agent becomes more likely to accept the behavior; otherwise the
   agent becomes more likely to refuse the behavior.

#. **Imitate by Count**:  This strategy is similar to the Imitate
   Consensus except that if the weighted number of nearby agents exceeds
   a threshold, the agent adjusts its probability *p* toward 1;
   otherwise the agents adjusts its probability toward 0.  For example,
   if the agent’s threshold is 3.0, then if the agent perceives that at
   least three its associates is willing to perform the behavior then
   the agent becomes more likely to accept the behavior; otherwise the
   agent becomes more likely to refuse the behavior.

#. **Health Belief Model**:  According the Health Belief Model, people
   make health behavior decision based on several specific
   considerations: susceptibility, severity, benefits, and barriers.

   #. *Perceived Susceptibility* refers to the person estimate of how
      likely he or she is to become adversely affected by the disease or
      condition;

   #. *Perceived Severity* refers to the level of adverse consequences
      that are likely if the person become affected;

   #. *Perceived Benefits* refers to the estimated protective effects of
      the behavior; and

   #. *Perceived Barriers* refers to the conditions that may prevent the
      agent from perform the behavior.

These constructs are clearly specific to the particular health behavior
under consideration, so including an HBM strategy for a particular
behavior in FRED requires customized programming.  However, once the
perceptions are computed, they can be combined into a decision rule
using formulas developed by David Durham (Durham, 2010).  These formulas
have been implemented in the FRED Behavior module, and are controlled by
run-time parameters. (See Parameters Section.)

Each agent is assigned a strategy independently for each behavior
defined for that agent.

Population-Level Market Shares
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For each behavior in FRED, the user may specify the fraction of the
population using each strategy for that behavior.  For example, it might
be desirable to investigate the effect of varying the fraction of the
population using the **Accept**, **Refuse**, and **Imitate Consensus**
strategies. The user can specify a given distribution, for example,
20% of the population adopts the **Accept** strategy, 30% adopts the
**Refuse** strategy, and 50% adopt the **Imitate Consensus** strategy
for a given behavior.  The share of the population can be specified
separately for each behavior.

See files ``Behavior.cc``, ``Health_Belief_Model.cc`` and
``Random_Behavior_Model.cc`` for further details.

Place Model
===========

All infections in FRED are transmitted from one agent to another in some
particular place. The types of places in FRED include: Households,
Neighborhoods, School, Classrooms, Workplaces and Offices.

The locations input file specifies the households, school and workplaces
in the modeled region.  The household for each agent in the population
file is required to be in the locations file.  The schools and
workplaces are optional (since an agent may attend a school or workplace
beyond the limits of the modeled region.)

Neighborhoods are defined on a grid with 1 km square cells.  The agent’s
home neighborhood is the cell in which its household is located.
However, an agent may visit another neighborhood in the community
during a given day. (See Agent Model section.)

Classrooms are small mixing groups with a given school.  Classrooms are
defined by dividing up all the students who attend a given school into
separate age groups.  Each age group is divided into classroom groups of
up to 40 students.  A student interacts with the students assigned to
the same classroom for the entire school year.  A student also interacts
(with a separate probability) with all the students attending the same
school.

School and classrooms are closed on weekends, during scheduled summer
breaks, and possibly due to school closure policies.

Offices are small mixing groups with a given workplace.  Offices are
defined by dividing up all the workers in a given workplace groups of up
to 50 workers.  A worker interacts with the other workers in the same
office, and, with a separate rate, with all workers in the same
workplace.

For further details, see files: ``Place_List.cc``, ``Place.cc``,
``Household.cc``, ``Neighborhood.cc``, ``School.cc``, ``Classroom.cc``, ``Workplace.cc``,
``Office.cc``.

Disease Model
=============

FRED supports multiple diseases circulating in the same population.
 Each Disease has separate parameters specifying transmissibility,
mortality rate, its natural history (e.g., latent period, infectious
period, symptomatic period).  See ``Disease.cc``

Each disease has an associated Epidemic object that keeps track of
population level statistics associated with the disease, such as the
number of agents that are Susceptible, Exposed, Infectious and
Recovered.  The Epidemic object prints out the daily reports to the
output file.  See ``Epidemic.cc``.

Transmission Model
------------------

The core phenomenon of an epidemic in FRED is the spread of an infection
from one agent to another in a particular place.  Each type of place
represents a distinct environment for the spread of infection.  Each
type of place is characterized by two sets of numeric parameters:

-  the number of contacts per infectious person per day, and

-  the probability that a contact transmits an infection

The number of contacts per day for each type of place is a tunable
parameter, and is set through the process described in the Calibration
Section.

The transmission probability for a give place type generally depends on
the age of the infectious person and the susceptible person.  These are
specified as vector input parameters.

The key method implementing infection is called
``Place::spread_infection()`` in ``Place.cc``.  This method is called once
a day for each infectious place (having at least one infectious
visitor).  The method follows the following procedure:

::

  For each infectious person ``i``, the expected number of contacts is:
    Num_contacts(i) = Trans(D) * CR(P) * Inf(i) * S(P)/N(P)

    where: Trans(D) is the transmissibility factor for disease D,
      CR(P) is the contact rate for place P,
      Inf(i) is the infectivity of agent i,
      S(P) is the number of susceptible agents visiting place P, and
      N(P) is the number of total agents who usually visit place P

  For contact number 1 .. Num_contacts(i)

    pick a susceptible agent j from today’s visitors;
    let PROB = Trans_prob(i.j) \* Sus(j)
    where Trans_prob(i.j) is the transmission probability from i to j,
    and Sus(j) is the susceptibility of agent j.

    If a random number R is less than PROB, then agent i infects agent j.

For further details, see ``Place.cc``, ``Household.cc``

Pandemic influenza model parameterization
-----------------------------------------

FRED is parameterized for a default pandemic influenza strain following
the process described in (Cooley P, Brown S, Cajka J, Chasteen B,
Ganapathi L, Grefenstette J, Hollingsworth CR, Lee BY, Levine B, Wheaton
WD, Wagener DK. The Role of Subway Travel in an Influenza Epidemic: A
New York City Simulation. J Urban Health. 2011 Aug 9. [Epub ahead of
print] PubMed PMID: 21826584.)  Paraphrasing the Supplementary Material
from (Cooley et al, 2011):

The pandemic was assumed to have the age-dependent attack rate pattern
of the historical 1957-8 “Asian” influenza A (H2N2), see Longini et al.
 Accordingly, we calibrated our model using the Ferguson et al. approach
from historical (1957–58, 1968–69) influenza pandemics. We specifically
used the 30–70 rule developed by Ferguson et al. in which 70% of all
transmission occurred outside the household: 33% in the general
community and 37% in schools and workplaces.

Following (Cooley et al, 2011), we adopted that additional requirement
that transmission rates in schools are double those in workplaces.
Calibrating the model involved targeting an epidemic with a 33% attack
rate (AR) consistent with the age specific parameters derived from the
1957-58 pandemic. Daily contact rates were treated as endogenous
parameters and were interpreted as the daily contact rates that
reproduced a pandemic with a 33% AR in a population with no acquired
immunity and satisfied the 30–70 rule. Therefore, our estimated contact
patterns produced an epidemic designed to be similar in transmissibility
to the 1957–58 epidemic with an AR of 33% and a basic reproductive rate
(R0) of approximately 1.4.

The calibration process using the Allegheny County synthetic population
results in the following default parameters:

::

  neighborhood_contacts[0] = 42.32
  school_contacts[0] = 15.83
  workplace_contacts[0] = 1.66
  classroom_contacts[0] = 31.66
  office_contacts[0] = 3.32

As in (Cooley et al, 2011) we assumed that 50% of sick individual stay
at home and do not interact with anyone outside of the household. Note
that our default school absentee rate is generally lower than other
models (e.g., Ferguson et al. use a 90% absentee rate). Additionally, we
assumed that all community contacts increase by 50% on weekends.

Contacts within Household
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Calibration to the 30-70 target criteria was impossible unless within
household contacts were treated differently than other locations.
 Following (Cooley at al, 2011), we assumed that each pair of agents
within a household make contact each day with a specified probability.
 This probability is tunes as part of the calibration step to achieve
the 30-70 target distribution.  The rersulting contact probability for
Allegheny County is:

``household_contacts[0] = 0.19``

Interventions
=============

Vaccines
--------

FRED provides a fairly robust capability for
simulating the use of vaccines during a pandemic.  Multiple vaccines can
be simulated simultaneously, with differing administration schedules and
target groups, and with different efficacies.  Each vaccine can also
have multiple doses and be restricted by age.  It is also possible to
model varied vaccines schedules by day.   Prioritization by age groups,
or by ACIP recommendation is available with the capability to vaccinate
only the priority group.  Currently, vaccines can only be applied to one
disease.

Vaccines in FRED are currently modeled as so-called “all or nothing”
vaccines.  Each vaccine is given an age-specific efficacy and efficacy
delay.  When an agent takes a vaccine, there is a random draw to
determine whether the vaccine will be efficacious for that agent.  If it
is not, then the vaccine has no effect until another vaccine or dose is
administered.  If the vaccine dose is efficacious, then the agent will
become immune to the disease after the specified efficacy delay.  As in
real life, the agent has no knowledge as to whether their dose of
vaccine was efficacious, and so if they are exposed after a failed
vaccine or during the delay period, they may get sick from the disease.

Vaccination programs currently implemented can be thought of as mass
vaccination strategies.  At the beginning of the simulation, a set of
queues is set up based on prioritization of the agents.  These queues
are then randomized and as vaccines are put into the system, agents can
choose whether or not to accept a vaccine.  To determine this decision,
the simulation can use a straight coverage probability, or a more
complex behavioral model.  Heads of households can make decisions for
younger members.

Antiviral drugs
---------------

School closure
--------------

FRED includes two school closure policies: global and individual.  There
are two triggers for the global school closure policy
(``school_closure_policy = global``). First, all schools decide to
close on the simulation day specified by the parameter
``school_closure_day``, unless that parameter is negative. Second, all
schools decide to close if the population attack rate exceeds a
threshold (``school_closure_threshold``).  With either trigger, school
closure is delayed by a number of days indicated by parameter
``school_closure_delay``.  Schools reopen after a number of days
indicated by parameter ``school_closure_period``.

If the individual school closure policy is selected
(``school_closure_policy = individual``), then each school is closed
if the attack rate within the school exceeds a threshold
(``school_closure_threshold``).  School closure is delayed by a number
of days indicated by parameter ``school_closure_delay``.  Schools
reopen after a number of days indicated by parameter
``school_closure_period``, but may close again if the school attack
rate exceeds the threshold.

The default is no school closure policy: ``school_closure_policy =
none``

School are always closed on weekends.  All schools also close for the
summer if the parameter ``school_summer_schedule`` is set.  In
that case, schools are closed between the dates specified by parameters
``school_summer_start`` and ``school_summer_end``, inclusive.

For details, see ``School.cc``.

Future Interventions
--------------------

It is planned to include other interventions in FRED, including:
quarantine; travel restrictions; environmental interventions (e.g.,
vector control); behavioral changes; official announcements and
warnings; and education campaigns.

Geography and Travel
====================

FRED represents geography as a hierarchy of fixed square grids.
 Currently there are three layers in the hierarchy, called Large Grid,
Grid, and Small Grid.

The Large Grid consists of 20km x 20km cells by default. The Large Grid
is aligned global geo-coordinate system. Cells in the Large Grid store
the population count for the cell, along with a vector of all persons
residing in that cell. In the future, the Large Grid may be appropriate
for storing climate or other environmental profiles.

The medium grid, called Grid, consists of 1km x 1km cells by default.
 These cells function as neighborhood units, and store information about
the preferred schools and workplaces attended by people living with the
cells.  This information is used when agents need to change schools, or
leave school and start to work.

The Small Grid consists of 10m x 10m cells.  In the future, these cells
will store fine-resolution information like the number of mosquitoes and
the presence of water containers.

For further details, see source files: ``Large_Grid.cc``, ``Large_Cell.cc``,
``Grid.cc``, ``Cell.cc``, ``Small_Grid.cc``, ``Small_Cell.cc``.

As an optional feature, agents can travel overnight for one or more
days.  When an agent is on overnight travel, the traveling agent (called
the “visitor”) resides in the household associated with another agent
(called the “visited agent”).  The visitor interacts with agents in the
visited agent’s household and neighborhood.  If the visitor is employed,
then the visitor also interacts with the visited agent’s office and
workplace.  Visitors do not attend school while traveling.

If travel is enabled, two additional input files are required, a cell
population file and a trip list file.  The cell population file contains
the total population for each cell, considering the entire U.S.
population.  The trip list file contains a large sample of trips from
one cell to another.  This file covers the entire U.S.  The trip file
can contain samples based on data obtained from air travel databases or
from any other source considered appropriate.  The current default is a
sample of 5 million cell-to-cell trips based on a gravity model of
travel, using the formula::

  Prob_travel(i,j) = Pop(i) * Pop(j) / (K * Distance(i,j))

where ``Pop(i)`` is the total population residing in cell ``i`` (derived from
the entire U.S. synthetic population), ``Distance(i,j)`` is the distance in
kilometers between the center of cells ``i`` and ``j``, and ``K`` is a normalization
factor so that ``Prob_travel(i,j)`` sums to 1.0.  Given the pdf defined by
the above formula, we select 5 million trips (with replacement) and
store these in the trip list file.

During the ``Travel::setup()`` method, the trip list sample is read, and
those trips involving the model region are retained.  The number of
daily trips involving the population in the model region is proportional
to the fraction of the retained trips.  The goal is that the expected
number of overnight trips involving agents in the modeled regions
remains invariant, regardless of the size of the model region.

The cell population file is used to set the probability of initiating a
trip between two cells.  If a trip between cells ``i`` and ``j`` is selected, it
is only initiated with probability ``dens(i) * dens(j)``, where ``dens(i)`` is
the fraction of the total population in cell ``i`` that actually occurs in
the synthetic population for the current model region.  For example, if
cell ``i`` is on the border of the model region and happens to contains only
50% of the entire cell population according to the current model
population, then the probability of any trip to or from cell ``i`` is
reduced by 50%.

Run-time Parameters
===================

The run-time parameters for FRED are contained in two parameter files.
The first file is ``$FRED_HOME/input_files/params.default`` and
contains the default values of all defined run-time parameters.  This
file should not be modified. The second file is usually called
``params`` and contains any parameter values that override the default
values.  The ``params`` file may be empty.

Both files have the same format. Lines that begin with a ``#`` character
are considered comments and are ignored. Parameters with scalar values
are specified with lines of the form:

``<name> = <value>``

For example:

::

  days = 100
  diseases = 1
  popfile = pop_Alleg.txt

Some parameters are vector valued, in which case the format is:

``<`` *name* ``> = <`` *size* ``>`` *v_1 v_2 ... v_size*

For example:

::

  # cdf of trip duration in days
  travel_duration = 6 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

If a parameter appears more than once in a parameter file, the last
setting takes precedence. If a parameter appears in both
``params.default`` and ``params``, the value in ``params`` overrides the
value in ``params.default``.

Input File Parameters
---------------------

FRED requires input files to describe the population of agents and the
locations they visit.  Another input file specifies the number of new
cases that are seeded into the population on each simulation day.

There are several other optional input files that are required only if
certain features are enabled.  The following table describes the input
file formats and related parameters.

Table 5.1: Input File Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Parameter                        | Type     | Definition, Defaults and Notes                                                  |
+==================================+==========+=================================================================================+
| ``popfile``                      | string   | *Required file containing one line per person*                                  |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**:                                                                    |
|                                  |          | ``$FRED_HOME/region/loc_Alleg.txt``                                             |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**:                                                                     |
|                                  |          | ``ID AGE SEX MARRIED OCCUPATION HOUSEHOLD SCHOOL WORKPLACE RELATIONSHIP``       |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: Since these files are usually large, you may want to store them in a    |
|                                  |          | centralized location                                                            |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+ 
| ``locfile``                      | string   | *Required file containing one line per location*                                |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**:                                                                    |
|                                  |          | ``$FRED_HOME/region/pop_Alleg.txt``                                             |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**:                                                                     |
|                                  |          | ``ID TYPE LAT LON`` where ``ID`` is a unique string; ``TYPE`` is one of         |
|                                  |          | {``H, S, W, M`` } for *Household*, *School*, *Workplace* or *Hospital*, resp;   |
|                                  |          | and ``LAT``, ``LON`` is the *latitude* and *longitude*                          |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: Since these files are usually large, you may want to store them in a    |
|                                  |          | centralized location                                                            |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``cell_popfile``                 | string   | *Optional file with the initial population per 20km-grid cell*                  |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**: ``$FRED_HOME/region/cell_pop.txt``                                 |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**: ``COL ROW POPULATION``                                              |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: ``Only used if enable_travel = 1``                                      |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``tripfile``                     | string   | *Optional file containing sample of trips between 20km-grid cells*              |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**: ``$FRED_HOME/region/trips.txt``                                    |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**: ``SRC_COL SRC_ROW DEST_COL DEST_ROW``                               |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: Only used if ``enable_travel = 1``                                      |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``primary_cases_file[d]``        | string   | *Required files giving the number of primary infections to introduce for each*  |
|                                  |          | *simulation day*                                                                |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**:                                                                    |
|                                  |          | ``$FRED_HOME/input_files/primary_cases_schedule_0.txt`` *(for disease 0)*       |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**:                                                                     |
|                                  |          | time step map *(see text)*                                                      |  
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: *More extensive documentation of the extended format given below*       |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``vaccination_capacity_file``    | string   | *Optional file giving vaccine availability*                                     |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**:                                                                    |
|                                  |          | ``$FRED_HOME/input_files/vaccination_capacity-0.txt`` *(for vaccine 0)*         |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**: ``START_DAY NUMBER_OF_DOSES``                                       |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: The number of doses is added to the system capacity every day until     |
|                                  |          | the day given on the following line, or until the end of the simulation         |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``yearly_birth_rate_file``       | string   | *Optional file containing age-specific birth rates for females*                 |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**: ``$FRED_HOME/input_files/birth_rate.txt``                          |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**: ``AGE BIRTH_RATE`` where the rate is the probability of giving      |
|                                  |          | birth at the given age in years.                                                |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: Only used if ``enable_births = 1``                                      | 
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``yearly_mortality_rate_file``   | string   | *Optional file containing age-related mortality rates*                          |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default**: ``$FRED_HOME/input_files/mortality_rate.txt``                      |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Format**: ``AGE M_RATE F_RATE`` where the rates are for males and females     |
|                                  |          | of the given age in years.                                                      |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | *Note*: Only used if ``enable_deaths = 1``                                      |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Population file format
----------------------

The population file containing one line per agent, and each line has the
following format, where fields are separating by white space:

ID AGE SEX MAR OCC HOUSEHOLD SCHOOL WORK RELATION

Description of fields
---------------------


==================  ============================  ===========================================
FIELD               TYPE                          MEANING
==================  ============================  ===========================================
ID                  STRING                        unique agent id
AGE                 INTEGER                       agent age in years
SEX                 CHAR (``M``, ``F`` or ``U``)  sex of agent
MAR                 INTEGER                       marital status
OCC                 INTEGER                       occupation code (not currently used)
HOUSEHOLD           STRING                        id of agent’s household
SCHOOL              STRING                        id of agent’s school
WORK                STRING                        id of agent’s workplace
RELATION            INTEGER                       relation to the head of household
==================  ============================  ===========================================

All fields are required.  The location IDs indicate the agent’s
*favorite places*, and correspond to IDs in the location file. The ID
value "-1" indicates that a location type does not apply to the agent.

``RELATION`` represents the relationship between the householder and the
individual. The possible values are

=============   =================================
RELATION        MEANING
=============   =================================
1               Householder
2               Husband/wife
3               Natural born son/daughter
4               Adopted son/daughter
5               Stepson/stepdaughter
6               Brother/sister
7               Father/mother
8               Grandchild
9               Parent-in-law
10              Son-in-law/daughter-in-law
11              Other relative
12              Brother-in-law/sister-in-law
13              Nephew/niece
14              Grandparent
15              Uncle/aunt
16              Cousin
17              Roomer/boarder
18              Housemate/roommate
19              Unmarried partner
20              Foster child
=============   =================================

Primary Cases File Format
-------------------------

The primary cases file is a required file giving the number of primary
infections to introduce for each simulation day.  The default format is::

  #line_format
  # the default 100 seeds on day zero...
  0 0 100

The full format is::

  start end attempts [ strain [ prob [ min [ lat lon radius ] ] ] ]

Only the first three fields are mandatory.  The first two fields give
the starting and ending day, and the third field specifies the number of
attempted infections per day. For each specified day we attempt to
generate new cases by randomly selecting agents (with replacement) and
infecting them if they are susceptible.  Note that the actual number of
infections may be less than the number of attempts because some selected
agents may already be infected or may be immune.  The process continues
until the end day indicated on the same line in the file, or until the
end of the simulation.

The fields others are optional, but if present, must be given in the
order above.  If a location is specified, then all three location fields
must be present (lat, lon & radius). The radius is specified in
kilometers. To disable geographic seeding either omit lat, lon & radius
or give a value for radius that is greater than 40075 or less than zero.

The example below will make 100 seeding attempts of strain 0 on day 0,
each with attempt probability of 1, requiring a minimum of 100
transmissions, all selected randomly from people whose households are
within 100km of the specified point.

::

  0 0 100 0 1 100 40.44181 -80.01278 100

Output Parameters
-----------------

FRED produces several output files. The level of detail can be controlled
by parameters described in the following table.

Table 2: Output Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Parameter                        | Type     | Definition, Defaults and Notes                                                  |
+==================================+==========+=================================================================================+
| ``outdir``                       | string   | Directory containing the output files.  If the string beings with “/” it is     |
|                                  |          | interpreted as an absolute path.  Otherwise, it is relative to the current      |
|                                  |          | working directory.                                                              |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** OUT                                                                |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``verbose``                      | int      | If set, print information for monitoring system progress to the standard        |
|                                  |          | output.  Higher values produce more output.                                     |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 1                                                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``debug``                        | int      | If set, print verbose debugging output to stdout. Higher values produce more    |
|                                  |          | output.                                                                         |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 0                                                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``track_infection_events``       | int      | If set, then a file called ``infections<n>.txt`` is created for ``run <n>``.    |
|                                  |          | This file contains one line per disease transmission event, showing the id      |
|                                  |          | of the infector, the infectee, and various other information.  The format for   |
|                                  |          | the infections file is:                                                         |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | ``DAY DISEASE_ID HOST_ID HOST_AGE INFECTOR_ID INFECTOR_AGE PLACE_ID``           |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | If ``track_infection_events > 1``, additional data is written on each line.     |
|                                  |          | For further details, see: ``Infection.cc``.                                     |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 1                                                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``quality_control``              | int      | If set, information about the size and age distribution for the various types   |
|                                  |          | of places is printed out in the Log file.                                       |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 1                                                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``rr_delay``                     | int      | Identifies the number of days between the definition of a cohort and the        |
|                                  |          | reporting of that cohort’s reproductive rate in the output file.  See examples  |
|                                  |          | below.                                                                          |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 20                                                                 |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``output_population``            | int      | If set, a file containing the current population will be output periodically.   |
|                                  |          | See explanation below.                                                          |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** 0                                                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``output_population_date_match`` | string   | If ``output_population`` is set, dump the population on any date that matches   |
|                                  |          | this string.  The format is ``DD-MM-YY``, with ``*`` matching any value.        |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** = ``01-01-*``                                                      |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``pop_outfile``                  | string   | Name of population dump file.                                                   |
|                                  |          |                                                                                 |
|                                  |          | **Default:** ``pop_out``                                                        |
+----------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Output file format
------------------

The outfile (called ``out<n>.txt`` for run *n*) contains one line for each
simulation day of the run.  The format of the file is:

=================   =============================================================================
KEY                 VALUE
=================   =============================================================================
Day                 Current day counter
Str                 Disease id
S                   Number of agents in Susceptible state for this disease
E                   Number of agents in Exposed state
I                   Number of agents in Infectious state
I_s                 Number of Infectious agents who are symptomatic
R                   Number of agents in Removed (Recovered) state
M                   Number of agents that are Immune
C                   Number of current Cases (new E’s)
N                   Population size
AR                  Attack Rate
CI                  Number of new symptomatic cases
CAR                 Clinical attack rate
RR                  Reproductive rate
NR                  Number in the cohort used to compute RR
Day_of_week         Current day of week, e.g., Wed
Date                Calendar date associated with the simulation day, eg, 2011-01-05
Year                Epidemiological year
Week                Epidemiological week (1-53)
=================   =============================================================================

*Note*: ``RR`` is the reproductive rate observed for a cohort of individuals
who were exposed on the same day.  ``NR`` is the size of the cohort.  The
day for which the cohort is defined in given by the parameter ``rr_delay``.

The default is: ``rr_delay = 20``

This value means that on day 20 of the output file, the ``RR`` for the
cohort exposed on day 0 is reported.  On day 21, the cohort exposed on
day 1 is printed and so on.  The delay should be made long enough to
capture all the infectees of the cohort.

Periodic Population Dumps
-------------------------

If the parameter ``output_population = 1``, then a file will be written on
the start day, the end day, and on any day matching
``output_population_date_match parameter``.  The file will be a dump of
the population that will be identical to the input population file, but
will have additional fields for the classroom and office ids (which are
both set at runtime).

Global Control Parameters
-------------------------

The following parameters provide basic control of FRED simulations.

start_date: 
~~~~~~~~~~~

  the calender date corresponding the simulation day 0.
  Format YYYY-MM-DD.

  ``start_date = 2011-01-01``

days: 
~~~~~

  the number of days in a single simulation run.  FRED runs for
  the given number of days regardless of the epidemic state (that is, FRED
  does not stop early if no one is currently infected.)

  ``days = 120``

seed: 
~~~~~

  the seed for the random number generator.  The seed values for
  all runs of the simulation are based on the initial seed and the run
  number, and are independent of the number of random numbers generated in
  other runs.

  ``seed = 123456``

reseed_day: 
~~~~~~~~~~~

  if ``reseed_day > -1``, start each run with the same random seed and
  then reset the seed at day reseed_day.  The effect is that the initial
  days will follow the same trajectory, but the simulations will follow
  independent trajectories starting on ``reseed_day``.  This permits
  estimation of conditional variance.

  ``reseed_day = -1``

office_size: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~

  maximum number of workers per office.  If set to 0,
  then workplaces are not subdivided into offices.

  ``office_size = 50``

classroom_size: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  maximum number of students per classroom.  If set
  to 0, then schools are not subdivided into classrooms.

  ``school_classroom_size = 40``

neighborhood: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  When deciding where to spend an agent’s
  *neighborhood time*, there are parameters to control the probability
  of selecting a random cell within the *community*, defined by the
  parameter ``community_distance`` (in km), and the probability that the
  agent goes to its *home neighborhood* (where the household is).  The
  default parameters are:

  ``# neighborhood activities``
  ``community_distance = 20``
  ``community_prob = 0.1``
  ``home_neighborhood_prob = 0.5``

  That is, 50% of the time, the neighborhood is the cell surrounding the
  household, and 10% of the time it is a random cell within 20km of home.
  The other 40% are distributed uniformly in the 8 cells immediately
  surrounding the home cell.

Disease Model Parameters
------------------------

diseases:
~~~~~~~~~

  The number of diseases circulating in the population. Any
  number of diseases is allowed.  Runtime and memory required is
  proportional to the number of diseases.

  ``diseases = 1``

  Each disease is described by the following set of parameters, indexed by
  the disease number d, where d = 0,...,diseases-1.

primary_cases_file[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  The file containing the number of primary
  cases to be injected into the simulation during each day.

  ``primary_cases_file[0] = primary_case_schedule-0.txt``

  The ``primary_cases_file[d]`` follows the *Multistrain Timestep Map input format*.

trans[d]:
~~~~~~~~~

  The transmissibility of disease d relative to an arbitrary
  baseline.

  ``trans[0] = 1.0``

symp[d]:
~~~~~~~~

  The probability of an infected person becoming symptomatic

  ``symp[0] = 0.67``

mortality_rate[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  The probability of an infected person dying (Not
  currently implemented)

  ``mortality_rate[0] = 0.00001``

infection_model[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Either ``0`` or ``1``.  Infection model 0 is a bifurcating
  model in which each infected agent passes through stages SEIR or SEiR,
  where “I” means infectious and symptomatic, and “i” means infectious but
  not symptomatic.  Infection model 1 is a sequential model in which
  infected agents pass through the stages SEiIR.  In any model, some
  stages may last for 0 days, except E, which always lasts at least 1 day.

  ``infection_model[0] = 0``

days_latent[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  discrete cdf for number of days between becoming
  exposed and becoming infectious.  With the values shown in the example
  below, there is an 80% chance of becoming infectious 1 day after
  exposure and a 20% chance of becoming infectious 2 days after exposure.

  ``days_latent[0] = 3  0 0.8 1.0``

days_asymp[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  discrete cdf for number of days the agent is
  infectious but asymptomatic.  With the values shown in the example
  below, the default setting , the agent may be asymptomatic between 3 to
  6 days.

  ``day_asymp[0] = 7   0.0  0.0  0.0  0.3  0.7  0.9  1.0``

days_symp[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  discrete cdf for number of days the agent is
  infectious and symptomatic.  With the values shown in the example below,
  the default setting , the agent may be symptomatic between 3 to 6 days.

  ``day_symp[0] = 7   0.0  0.0  0.0  0.3  0.7  0.9  1.0``

immunity_loss_rate[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  rate at which a person loses immunity after
  recovering from infection. If greater than 0.0, the number of days in
  state ’R’ is drawn from an exponential distribution with parameter
  ``1 / immunity_loss_rate``.

  ``immunity_loss_rate[0] = 0``

symp_infectivity[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  multiplier for how infective a symptomatic agent is.

  ``symp_infectivity[0] = 1.0``

asymp_infectivity[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  multiplier for how infective an asymptomatic agent is.

  ``asymp_infectivity[0] = 0.5``

residual_immunity_ages[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``residual_immunity_ages[0] = 0``

residual_immunity_values[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``residual_immunity_values[0] = 0``

pregnancy_prob_ages:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``pregnancy_prob_ages = 0``

pregnancy_prob_values:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``pregnancy_prob_values = 0``

at_risk_ages[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``at_risk_ages[d] = 0``

at_risk_values[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``at_risk_values[d] = 0``

prob_stay_home: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  The probability that a symptomatic agent stays home

  ``prob_stay_home = 0.5``

mutation_prob:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``mutation_prob = 1 0.0``

Contact Rates
-------------

The following parameters determine the number of potentially infective
daily contacts between an infectious agent and a susceptible agent in a
given type of location.  The default values are calibrated for Allegheny
County using the bifurcating infection model (``infection_model = 0``).

household_contacts[d]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  contact rate for households.
  
  ``household_contacts[d] = 0.19``

neighborhood_contacts[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  contact rate for neighborhoods.
  
  ``neighborhood_contacts[0] = 42.32``

school_contacts[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  contact rate for schools.

  ``school_contacts[0] = 15.83``

workplace_contacts[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  contact rate for workplaces.

  ``workplace_contacts[0] = 1.66``

classroom_contacts[d], office_contacts[0]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  By default, classroom contacts are double the school contacts, and
  office contacts are double the workplace contacts.  These defaults are
  indicated as follows:

  ``classroom_contacts[0] = -1``
  ``office_contacts[0] = -1``

  These defaults can be overridden if values other than -1 are provided in
  the params file.

weekend_contact_rate[d]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  multiplier of neighborhood contacts on
  weekend.  The default is to increase weekend contacts by 50%:

  ``weekend_contact _rate[0] = 1.5``

Transmission probabilities
--------------------------

The following parameters determine the probability that a potentially
infective contact between an infectious agent and a symptomatic agent
actually results in an infection.   Transmission probabilities are
defined for a given group in a given type of location. Each parameter is
interpreted as a square matrix with the values given in row-order.  The
labels associated with the rows and columns (the groups) are specified
in the comments, and are defined in the class associated with the
parameter.  For example, the definition of elementary students is
defined in ``School.cc``. The defaults are::

  # groups = children adults
  household_prob[d] = 4 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.4
  neighborhood_prob[d] = 4 0.0048 0.0048 0.0048 0.0048

  # groups = adult_workers
  workplace_prob[d] = 1 0.0575
  office_prob[d] = 1 0.0575

  # groups = elem_students mid_students high_students teachers
  school_prob[d] = 16 0.0435 0 0 0 0 0.0375 0 0 0 0 0.0315 0 0 0 0 0.0575
  classroom_prob[d] = 16 0.0435 0 0 0 0 0.0375 0 0 0 0 0.0315 0 0 0 0 0.0575

Multistrain Timestep Map Format
-------------------------------

The first line of the timestep map file specifies the format to be used.

Currently ``#line_format`` is the only supported format.  Future work may
allow for some type of structured (key = value) format to permit more
detailed specification of seeding behavior.

Any line beginning with ``#`` is interpreted as a comment and ignored.
Every other line is interpreted as a seeding instruction and expected
to follow the format::

  start end attempts [ strain [ prob [ min [ lat lon radius ] ] ] ]

Mandatory Fields:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first three fields (*start*, *end*, *attempts*) are mandatory.  The others
are optional, but, if present, must be given in the order above.

The *start* and *end* fields are indexed from zero and can be used to
specify a range of days beginning on *start* and continuing to *end*
(inclusive).  To specify seeding on a single day, set *start* equal to
*end*.

The *attempts* field determines the number of seeding attempts for the
given range of time steps.  If no further fields are present, this
number of individuals are randomly chosen with replacement from the
entire population and transmission of the disease is attempted.  Note
that sampling includes individuals who may already be infected; in this
case the actual number of new seeds may be less than the number
specified by *attempts*.

Optional Fields:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *strain* field gives the numeric id of the strain to be seeded for
this timestep.  If the *strain* field is not given, seeds will be strain
"0".

The *prob* field can be used to introduce some randomness into the number
of seeding events attempted at the time step.  With probability 1 - *prob*
each of the attempts specified by *attempt* will be skipped.

The *min* field can be used to ensure that a minimum number of attempts
actually result in transmission.  If specified, individuals will
continue (1000 additional times) to be selected from the population
until *min* number of successful transmissions have been created.  If 1000
additional selections from the population are insufficient to create the
specified minimum number of transmissions, a warning is given and
execution of the program continues.

The geographic area from which individuals are selected can be specified
by giving the coordinates of a point (lat, lon) and a *radius* specified
in kilometers.  When enabled, random sampling is restricted to only
those individuals whose households are located within the specified
area.

Additional information on the timestep map format may be found in
``README_Timestep_Maps``.

Intervention Parameters
-----------------------

school closure parameters:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

  # set to 1 if schools closed during summer
  school_summer_schedule = 0

  # summer schedule dates (format MM-DD)
  school_summer_start = 06-01
  school_summer_end = 08-31
  school_closure_policy = none

  # school_closure_policy = global

  # school_closure_policy = individual

  # number of days to keep a school closed
  school_closure_period = 10

  # delay after reaching any trigger before closing schools
  school_closure_delay = 2

  # day to close school under global policy
  school_closure_day = 10

vaccine_tracefile:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  If the value is “none”, no vaccine tracefiles
  are produced.  Otherwise, a vaccine tracefile is produced for each run
  in the directory given the outdir parameter. A vaccine tracefile
  contains one record for each agent, giving the agent’s vaccination
  history. Vaccine tracefiles are named ``vtrace1.txt``, ``vtrace2.txt``, etc.

  ``vaccine_trace = none``

number_of_vaccine: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  the number of types of vaccines that you would
  like to run in the simulation.  There needs to be a set of vaccine
  parameters for each vaccine in the system or the simulation will end in
  error.

  **Default: 0**

vaccine_prioritize_acip: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Enable prioritization of vaccination by
  ACIP recommendations.  This includes persons aged 0-24, people deemed at
  risk for complications for influenza (see at_risk_ages and
  at_risk_values keywords), pregnant women (see pregnancy_prob_ages
  and pregnancy_prob_values keywords), and people over age 64.

  **Default: 0**

vaccine_prioritize_by_age: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Enables prioritization of vaccination
  by age group.  The age groups will be defined by the two following
  keywords.

  **Default: 0**

vaccine_priority_age_low: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  If vaccine_prioritize_by_age is
  specified as 1, this specifies the lower limit of the prioritized age
  group inclusively.     

  **Default: 0**

vaccine_priority_age_high: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  If vaccine_prioritize_by_age is
  specified as 1, this specifies the upper limit of the prioritized age
  group inclusively.     

  **Default: 100**

vaccine_dose_priority: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  If there are multi-dose vaccines, this
  parameter defines prioritization of people getting multiple doses vs.
  people getting their first dose.

  Possible values:

    #. No Priority, first come first serve

    #. Place people getting subsequent dose at the beginning of the queue

    #. Mix in people getting subsequent dose with other priority vaccinations randomly

    #. Place people getting subsequent dose at the end of the queue

  **Default: 0**


vaccine_capacity_file:  
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  This parameter specifies a file that
  defines how many agents the system has the capacity to vaccinate on a
  given day throughout the simulation.  This may be more or less than the
  amount of vaccine available through production.  This parameter is meant
  to allow the user to attenuate the system’s ability to actually
  vaccinate people due to limitations in personnel, time and resources.

  The format of this file follows a reduced Multistrain TimeStep file,
  with a format as follows::

    Day_start     Capacity1
    Day_change1   Capacity2
    Day_change2   Capacity3

  For example: If one wanted to define that for the first 3 days of the
  simulation, the system could vaccinate no one, then on days 4-10, it
  could vaccinate 10000 people per day, then dropping down to 5000 per day
  on day 11 through the rest of the simulation, the
  vaccine_capacity_file would look like this::

    1   0
    4   10000
    11  5000

  The next set of parameters need to be defined for every vaccine in the
  simulation, and they will all be indexed by the vaccine number they
  define (signified by X).

vaccine_number_of_doses[X]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Specifies the number of doses needed
  for vaccine X.  There needs to be a dose specification for each dose
  indicated, or the simulation will end in error.

  **Default: 1**

vaccine_total_avail[X]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Specifies the total amount of doses of
  vaccine X available for the entire simulation.

  **Default: 1000000000**

vaccine_additional_per_day[X]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  The amount of vaccine X produced
  each day and made available to the system.   The amount of vaccine
  produced cannot exceed ``vaccine_total_avail[X]``, for the entire
  simulation.

  **Default: 1000000**

vaccine_starting_day[X]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  The day to start producing vaccine X at
  the rate defined by ``vaccine_additional_per_day[X]``.

  **Default: 0**

  *The next set of parameters must be specified for each dose (specified by Y) of vaccine X.*

vaccine_next_dosage_day[X][Y]: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  Specifies the day of the dosage
  schedule that the next dose should be taken.  For instance, if the dose
  Z of a vaccine is to be taken 7 days after dose Y, then this parameter
  for dose Y would be seven.  The last dose of a vaccine is always 0.

  **Default: 0**

vaccine_dose_efficacy_ages[X][Y] and vaccine_dose_efficacy_values[X][Y]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  These parameters specify the age map for defining the efficacy of vaccine X, dose Y.  The values
  should be probabilities between 0 and 1 that specify the probability
  that a person of a certain age will become immune after taking this dose
  of vaccine.

  **Defaults:**::

    vaccine_dose_efficacy_ages[0][0] = 2 0 100
    vaccine_dose_efficacy_values[0][0] = 1 0.70

vaccine_dose_efficacy_delay_ages[X][Y] and vaccine_dose_efficacy_delay_values[X][Y]:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  These parameters specify the age map for defining the delay to efficacy of vaccine X
  dose Y. The values should be integer numbers of days by age.

  **Defaults:**::

    vaccine_dose_efficacy_delay_ages[0][0] = 2 0 100
    vaccine_dose_efficacy_delay_values[0][0] = 1 14

Anti-virals parameters:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

  ``number_antivirals = 0`` (**Default**)

Overnight Travel Parameters
---------------------------

Parameters controlling long-distance overnight travel:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

  # enable overnight travel (optional)
  enable_travel = 0

  # cdf of trip duration in days
  travel_duration = 6 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

..

  That is, the default probability for the duration of travel being *i*
  days is 0.2, for  *i* =  1 to 5 days.

::

  # distance threshold for overnight trips (in km)
  min_travel_distance = 100.0

  # trips per day assuming entire US population
  max_trips_per_day = 1000000

  # file containing list of sample trips
  tripfile = trips.txt

..

  The format of the tripfile is:

  ``COL1 ROW1 COL2 ROW2``

  where (``COL1``, ``ROW1``) give the global cell coordinates for one endpoint,
  and (``COL2``, ``ROW2``) give the global cell coordinates for the other
  endpoint.  The order of the endpoints in irrelevant.

::

  # file with population estimate for each large cell
  cell_popfile = cell_pop.txt

..

  The format of the cell_popfile is:

  ``COL1 ROW1 POP``

  where (``COL1``, ``ROW1``) give the global cell coordinates for one cell and ``POP``
  is the number of agents in that cell according to the overall U.S.
  synthetic population file.

Behavioral Parameters
---------------------

For each health-related behavior, FRED requires several parameters to
describe how the behavior is modeled in the population. The current set
of behavior includes:

-  stay_home_when_sick
-  keep_child_home_when_sick
-  accept_vaccine
-  accept_vaccine_dose
-  accept_vaccine_for_child
-  accept_vaccine_dose_for_child

In the following, replace ``<behavior_name>`` with the name of the
specific behavior::

  # enable the behavior
  <behavior_name>_enabled = 1

  #### BEHAVIOR MARKET SEGMENTS
  #
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 0 = ALWAYS REFUSE
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 1 = ALWAYS ACCEPT
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 2 = FLIP WEIGHTED COIN FOR EACH DECISION
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 3 = IMITATE PREVALENCE
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 4 = IMITATE CONSENSUS
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 5 = IMITATE COUNT
  # BEHAVIOR STRATEGY 6 = HEALTH BELIEF MODEL
  #
  # Each distribution should add up to 100
  <behavior_name>_strategy_distribution = 7 50 50 0 0 0 0 0

  ##### FLIP/IMITATE INITIAL PROBS AND DECISION FREQUENCY
  <behavior_name>_min_prob = 0
  <behavior_name>_max_prob = 1
  <behavior_name>_frequency = 1

  #### IMITATION THRESHOLDS
  <behavior_name>_imitate_consensus_threshold = 0
  <behavior_name>_imitate_count_threshold = 0

  ##### WEIGHTS FOR IMITATION
  ## ORDER IS HOUSEHOLD NEIGHBORHOOD SCHOOL WORK ALL
  ## Weights can be any real number.
  ##
  <behavior_name>_imitate_prevalence_weights = 5 0 0 0 0 1
  <behavior_name>_imitate_consensus_weights = 5 0 0 0 0 1
  <behavior_name>_imitate_count_weights = 5 0 0 0 0 1

  #### IMITATE UPDATE RATES: HOW RAIDLY TO CONFORM TO CONSULT OTHERS
  <behavior_name>_imitate_prevalence_update_rate = 0.1
  <behavior_name>_imitate_consensus_update_rate = 0.1
  <behavior_name>_imitate_count_update_rate = 0.1
  <behavior_name>_susceptibility_threshold = 2 0 0

  #### HEALTH BELIEF MODEL PARAMETERS (EXPERIMENTAL)
  <behavior_name>_severity_threshold = 2 0 0
  <behavior_name>_benefits_threshold = 2 0 0
  <behavior_name>_barriers_threshold = 2 0 0
  <behavior_name>_memory_decay = 2 0 0
  <behavior_name>_base_odds_ratio = 1
  <behavior_name>_susceptibility_odds_ratio = 1
  <behavior_name>_severity_odds_ratio = 1
  <behavior_name>_benefits_odds_ratio = 1
  <behavior_name>_barriers_odds_ratio = 1

Running FRED
============

The FRED program takes an optional command line argument, the name of
the run-time parameters file::

  % FRED parameter_file_name

If the argument is omitted the name “params” is assumed.

In addition, a set of scripts is provided for managing the process of
running a large number of simulations with FRED.  

Simulation Information Management System
========================================

There are several options for running FRED. The FRED executable is
copied to the ``$FRED/bin directory`` after each make, so you can run FRED
as follows from any working directory, assuming that you have added
``$FRED_HOME/bin`` to your path:

::

  % FRED [paramfile [run_number [directory]]]

The arguments are optional from right to left.  If all three arguments
are given, FRED uses the given paramfile, runs a single replication with
number ``run_number``, and writes output files to the given directory.
The output directory is relative to the current working directory.

If the third argument is omitted, the output directory is taken from the
runtime parameter ``outdir``, with default value "OUT".

If both the second and third arguments are missing, ``run_number`` defaults
to 1.

If all arguments are missing, ``paramfile`` defaults to "params".

Examples:

::

  # run FRED on file params and write output files to ./OUT:
  % FRED

  # run FRED on file params.foo and write output files to ./OUT:
  % FRED params.foo

  # run FRED on file params with run number = 2
  % FRED params 2

  # run FRED on file params.foo
  # with run number = 2 writing output files to ./OUT.foo:
  % FRED params.foo 2 OUT.foo

Using the run_fred script for multiple realizations
---------------------------------------------------

The ``run_fred`` script is provided to perform multiple realizations
(runs) in a local directory.  Each run uses a distinct seed for the
random number generator, so the results will vary from run to run. The
format is:

::

  % run_fred -p paramfile -d directory -s start_run -n end_run

The order of the arguments doesn’t matter, and all arguments have
default values:

::

  -p params
  -d ""
  -s 1
  -n 1

For example, the command:

::

  % run_fred -p params -d FOO -s 1 -n 3

translates to a set of commands:

::

  % FRED params 1 FOO > FOO/LOG1
  % FRED params 2 FOO > FOO/LOG2
  % FRED params 3 FOO > FOO/LOG3

after first creating directory ``FOO`` if necessary. The ``run_fred`` script
also copies the params file into the output directory, for future reference.

If ``-d`` is not specified on the command line, FRED writes output files to
the output directory specified in the ``outdir`` runtime parameters,
which default to ``OUT``.  For example, if params does not specify an
output directory, then

::

  % run_fred -n 3

translates to:

::

  % FRED params 1 OUT > OUT/LOG1
  % FRED params 2 OUT > OUT/LOG2
  % FRED params 3 OUT > OUT/LOG3

The random seed for each run is set based on the both the seed value in
the params file and on the run number, so a collection of FRED runs can
be executed in any order with the same results.  For example, you should
get the same results in the output directory from

::

  % run_fred -n 20

as from:

::

  % run_fred -n 10
  % run_fred -s 11 -n 20

FRED runtime management scripts
-------------------------------

The ``$FRED_HOME/bin`` directory includes several commands to manage the
process of running FRED jobs.  Commands exist for starting FRED jobs,
reporting the status of those jobs, and organizing and reporting the
results files. The bin directory contains the following commands:

====================================  ==================================================================
Command                               Explanation
====================================  ==================================================================
``fred_job``                          runs FRED and stores all associated data in a results database
``fred_AR``                           report on the the attack rate of a simulation
``fred_clear_all_results``            flush the results database
``fred_delete``                       delete a single job from the results database
``fred_display_plot``                 display one or more curves
``fred_jobs``                         show that status of all jobs in the results database
``fred_plot``                         plot a curve
``fred_plot_data``                    retrieve the data associated with a curve
``fred_report``                       create statistical summaries of output variables
``fred_status``                       report the status of a single job
``fred_sweep``                        run a set of simulation changing the value of a variable
``fred_tail``                         show the tail of the current output file
``get_distr``                         show the distribution of infection locations
``ch``                                change a parameter value in a params file
``p``                                 print out the current params file
====================================  ==================================================================

To use these commands, set the environmental variable ``$FRED_HOME`` to the
location of your FRED distribution.  Then add ``$FRED_HOME/bin`` to your
path. The following are most likely to be the most useful commands when
starting to use FRED.  

Command descriptions:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``% fred_job [-p paramsfile | -k key | -c ]``
.............................................

  Run FRED with the given parameter file in a working directory created in
  the ``$FRED_HOME/RESULTS`` directory, and associate the working directory
  with the key.  If the ``-p`` option is omitted, the file ``params`` is
  assumed.  If the ``-k`` option is omitted, an internally created key is
  generated.  In either case, a ``<key,id>`` pair is printed on standard
  output, where ``<id>`` is the identifier of directory associated with
  the run (*i.e.* ``$FRED_HOME/RESULTS/JOB/<id>``).

  ``fred_job`` will terminate if the user supplied key has already been
  used. If the ``-c`` (cache) arguments is specified, then if the params file
  duplicates a previous params file, ``fred_job`` associates the key with
  previous id, and does not re-run FRED.  The script sets the **STATUS** of
  the request (see fred_status below).  When FRED finishes, ``fred_job``
  runs stats to collect data on the output variables in the outfile.

``% ch param_name value [ paramfile ]``
.......................................

  Edit the given paramfile (or “params” if no file is given) and add a
  line::

    param_name = value

  First checks to see if the given param_name occurs in ``params.default``.

  *Note*: If the parameter contained a shell meta-character, you should
  enclose the parameter name in quotes.

``% fred_AR -k key``
....................

  Return mean and std dev of attack rate (AR) for run associated with key.

``% fred_clear_all_results``
............................

  Flush all the data from the results database.

``% fred_delete -k key``
........................

  Delete a single job from the results database. Example::

    % fred_delete -k test1
    KEY = test1  RUN = 15
    You are about to delete /Users/gref/Desktop/FRED/RESULTS/RUN/15. This
    cannot be undone.
    Proceed? yes/no [no]
    y
    /Users/gref/Desktop/FRED/RESULTS/RUN/15 deleted

  The ``-f`` flag forces deletion::

    % fred_delete -f -k test1
    /Users/gref/Desktop/FRED/RESULTS/RUN/15 deleted

``% fred_display_plot -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|C|c|M|A|r]``
.......................................................

  Run fred_plot and then opens the resulting plot file.

``% fred_jobs``
...............

  Show that status of all jobs in the results database.For example::

    % fred_jobs**
    KEY = baseline           JOB =   1     STATUS = FINISHED Thu Sep 30 12:20:04 2010
    KEY = baseline_trans[0]=0.9      JOB =   2     STATUS = FINISHED Thu Sep 30 14:21:43 2010
    KEY = baseline_trans[0]=1     JOB =   3     STATUS = FINISHED Thu Sep 30 14:52:40 2010
    KEY = baseline_trans[0]=1.1      JOB =   4     STATUS = RUNNING-43 Thu Sep 30 15:07:35 2010
    The dates shown for FINISHED jobs reflect the time that they finished.

``% fred_plot -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|C|c|M|A|r]``
...............................................

  Create a plot of one or more of the indicated measures for the indicated
  run.  The plot file (type PNG) is stored in RESULTS under the run’s
  REPORT directory.  Prints the full path to the plot file.

``% fred_plot_data -k key -v [S|E|I|R|s|C|c|M|A|r]``
....................................................

  Print the data for plotting the graph to standard output, in space
  delimited format:

  ``day mean stdev``

``% fred_status -k key [-s secs]``
..................................

  Print the status of the FRED run associated with the given key.  If {}-s
  option is given, repeats status report every secs seconds.

``% fred_sweep key param lower_bound upper_bound increment``
............................................................

  Run a set of simulation changing the value of a parameter. All 5
  arguments are required. The arguments are:

  ``key`` = a suffix for the parameter file that defines the scenario.
  ``param`` = the name of the parameter you wish to sweep
  ``lower_bound``, ``upper_bound``, ``increment`` are self-explanatory.

  You must first create a file called ``params.<key>`` that sets up the
  rest of the parameters.  For each value of the named parameter, the
  script creates a params file called
  ``params.<key>_<parameter>=<value>`` and executes the command:

    ``% fred_job -p params.<key>_<parameter>=<value> -k <key>_<parameter>=<value>``

  Each ``fred_job`` command is executed in the foreground, so the jobs run
  one at a time.

  *Note*: If the parameter contained a shell meta-character, you should
  enclose the parameter name in quotes. Example:

    ``% fred_sweep baseline ’trans[0]’ 0.9 1.1 0.1``

  has the effect of making three copies of the file ``params.baseline``,
  changing the value of ``trans[0]`` in each one and executes

    ``% fred_job -p params.baseline_trans[0]=0.9 -k baseline-trans[0]-0.9``
    ``% fred_job -p params.baseline_trans[0]=1 -k baseline-trans[0]-1``
    ``% fred_job -p params.baseline_trans[0]=1.1 -k baseline-trans[0]-1.1``

``% fred_tail -k key``
......................

  Run the tail -f command on the current output file.

``% get_distr``
...............

  Show the distribution of infection locations.

``% p``
.......

  Print out the current params file.

``% rt``
........

  Run regression test.

Notes for Developers
====================

Contributed Code
----------------

FRED is intended to be a system that evolves over time to be the varied
need of researchers in the infectious disease modeling field.  We hope
that developers will want to modify the code and add new features.  If
you do develop new features and want to share with the rest of the FRED
community, please consider adding it to the official FRED distribution.
 We are happy to discuss this in more detail.

Coding Standards
----------------

The FRED team believes that coding standards in general make for
cleaner, more readable code, and may help avoid certain pitfalls.  We
have tried to develop FRED according to the
`Google code standards <http://google-styleguide.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/cppguide.xml>`_.

No claim is made that we have achieved complete success, but we have
found the attempt helpful.

Regression Tests
----------------

FRED includes a number of regression tests that can be run after editing
the code to help catch unintended changes.  The ``$FRED_HOME/bin``
directory contains some scripts to support testing FRED:

============================      ==============================
``make_rt directory_name``        make files for regression test
``rt [-p] [directory_name]``      run regression test
============================      ==============================

The test directory tree is located at ``$FRED_HOME/tests``. The tests
for the FRED base code are located in subdirectory ``base``.  There are
a few other test directories, and more will be added over time.  Each
test directory contains at least two files: ``params.test`` and
``compare``. The ``params.test`` file contains the run-time parameters
that test the given feature.  The FRED script ``rt`` runs a few FRED
simulations in the test directory, using the ``params.test`` file.  The
output is directed to subdirectory ``OUT.TEST``.  The ``rt`` script
compares the output files in ``OUT.TEST`` with the files in subdirectory
``OUT.RT``.  The specific comparisons are up to the developer, and are
found in the executable file ``compare``, which is run by the ``rt``
script when the simulations are complete.  If no errors are generated by
``compare``, then FRED can be said to have passed this particular
regression test.

The ``rt`` script takes two optional arguments:

  ``% rt –p test_name``

  ``test_name`` should be the name of one of the directories in
  ``$FRED_HOME/tests``.  If this argument is omitted, ``test_name`` defaults
  to “base”.

  If the ``–p`` argument is given, ``rt`` will run the test simulations in
  parallel.  If ``–p`` is given in must be the first argument.

  The ``rt`` command can be run from any directory.  It will temporarily
  change to the test directory to run FRED, and then return to the
  original directory.

To create a new regression test, do the following:

#. Create a new directory in $FRED_HOME/tests:

  ``% mkdir $FRED_HOME/tests/foo``

#. Create a params file in that directory.

#. Create an executable file called ``compare`` that implements whatever
tests you wish to make on the resulting FRED output files in
subdirectory ``OUT.TEST``.

#. Run the script ``make_rt`` to create the target output file.  These
will be stored in subdirectory ``OUT.RT``.

  ``% make_rt foo``

Test your regression test by running::

  ``rt foo``
  ``rt –p foo``

References
==========

Beckman RJ., Baggerly K, McKay M. Creating synthetic baseline
populations. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice. 1996;
30(6): 415-429.

Brown ST, Tai JH, Bailey RR, Cooley PC, Wheaton WD, Potter MA, Voorhees
RE, LeJeune M, Grefenstette JJ, Burke DS, McGlone SM, Lee BY. Would
school closure for the 2009 H1N1 influenza epidemic have been worth the
cost?: a computational simulation of Pennsylvania. BMC Public Health.
2011 May 20;11:353. PubMed PMID: 21599920; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3119163.

`Cajka, JC, Cooley, PC, Wheaton, WD. Attribute Assignment to a Synthetic
Population in Support of Agent-Based Disease Modeling RTI Press.
2010; <http://www.rti.org/pubs/mr-0019-1009-cajka.pdf>`_

Cooley P, Brown S, Cajka J, Chasteen B, Ganapathi L, Grefenstette J,
Hollingsworth CR, Lee BY, Levine B, Wheaton WD, Wagener DK. The role of
subway travel in an influenza epidemic: a New York City simulation. J
Urban Health. 2011 Oct;88(5):982-95. PubMed PMID: 21826584; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3191213.

Lee BY, Brown ST, Cooley PC, Zimmerman RK, Wheaton WD, Zimmer SM,
Grefenstette JJ, Assi TM, Furphy TJ, Wagener DK, Burke DS. A computer
simulation of employee vaccination to mitigate an influenza epidemic. Am
J Prev Med. 2010 Mar;38(3):247-57. Epub 2009 Dec 30. PubMed PMID:
20042311; PubMed Central PMCID:  PMC2833347.

Lee BY, Brown ST, Korch GW, Cooley PC, Zimmerman RK, Wheaton WD, Zimmer
SM, Grefenstette JJ, Bailey RR, Assi TM, Burke DS. A computer simulation
of vaccine prioritization, allocation, and rationing during the 2009
H1N1 influenza pandemic. Vaccine. 2010 Jul 12;28(31):4875-9. Epub 2010
May 16. PubMed PMID: 20483192; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2906666.

Lee BY, Brown ST, Cooley P, Potter MA, Wheaton WD, Voorhees RE, Stebbins
S, Grefenstette JJ, Zimmer SM, Zimmerman RK, Assi TM, Bailey RR, Wagener
DK, Burke DS. Simulating school closure strategies to mitigate an
influenza epidemic. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2010
May-Jun;16(3):252-61. PubMed PMID: 20035236; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC2901099.

Lee BY, Brown ST, Bailey RR, Zimmerman RK, Potter MA, McGlone SM, Cooley
PC, Grefenstette JJ, Zimmer SM, Wheaton WD, Quinn SC, Voorhees RE, Burke
DS. The benefits to all of ensuring equal and timely access to influenza
vaccines in poor communities. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011
Jun;30(6):1141-50. PubMed PMID: 21653968.

`Wheaton, W.D., Cajka, J.C., Chasteen, B.M., Wagener, D.K., Cooley, P.C.,
Ganapathi, L., Roberts, D.J., Allpress, J.L. (May 2009). Synthesized
population databases: A US geospatial database for agent-based models:
RTI Press Publication No. MR-0010-0905. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI
Press. <http://www.rti.org/pubs/mr-0010-0905-wheaton.pdf>`_

Appendix: FRED License Agreement
================================

A license is hereby granted by University of Pittsburgh Graduate School
of Public Health (“GSPH”), free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of the software package called FRED and associated documentation
files (the {}Software{}), to use, copy, modify and merge copies of the
Software, subject to the following conditions:

1. You acknowledge and agree that the license granted hereunder is
personal to you, and you will not under any circumstances sell, give,
disclose, lend, or otherwise distribute the Software to third parties.
You further agree that you will not use the Software for commercial
purposes.

2. You acknowledge and agree that GSPH retains all ownership rights,
including copyright rights in the Software and that by entering into
this license, you do not acquire any such rights in the Software.

3. You acknowledge and agree that THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS,
WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

4. If the Software is used to obtain a result, and that result is
published in the public literature, then you agree to acknowledge its
use of the Software in the following citation:

Copyright 2011, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public
Health, John Grefenstette, Shawn Brown, Roni Rosenfield, Alona Fyshe,
David Galloway, Nathan Stone, Bruce Lee, Phil Cooley, William Wheaton,
Thomas Abraham, Jay DePasse, Anuroop Sriram, and Donald Burke.

5. You agree to indemnify and hold harmless GSPH from and against all
damages, liabilities, attorney fees, and costs arising out of your use
of the Software.
